International Journal of Intelligent Systems and Applications in Engineering  IJISAE, 2024, 12( 14s), 309–319 |  310 provide suggestions to researchers for future works.  
The rest of the research paper is organized as follows - 
Section II describes methodology followed by the authors to 
conduct this literature review. Section III describes the 
results followed by conclusion in future scope in Section IV.  
2. Materials and Methods  
We carried out a PRISMA comprehensive review to analyze 
technological advancements in the field of translation of 
Indian sign language into text. The research questions were 
formulated in the first step to initiate the process of 
conducting literature revi ew. 
• RQ1 - What is the focus of study in previous literature 
review in the field of ISLTS?  
• RQ2 -What are various types of datasets available for 
researchers in the field of ISLTS?  
• RQ3 - What are the number of research paper published 
per year on ISLT/RS?  
• RQ4 - What are existing techniques for translating ISL 
gestures and their performance?  
2.1 Search Query  
Different research papers related to ISLTS/ Indian Sign 
Language Recognition System (ISLRS) were searched on 
four popular research databases such as Scopus, Google 
Scholar, Science Direct and Lensorg. The principal 
objective of this literature survey is to  examine 
translation/recognition attempts made in the ISL sector. 
Open Access articles in English language has been selected 
for this review process from year 2010 to 2023 based on the 
search  queries  mentioned in Table 1.  
Table 1. Search Query  
Name of 
Dataset  Query  
Scopus  TITLE -ABS -KEY  ( "INDIAN SIGN 
LANGUAGE 
TRANSLATION"   OR  "ISL 
TRANSLATION"   OR  "ISL 
RECOGNITION"   OR  "INDIAN 
SIGN LANGUAGE 
RECOGNITION"  )  AND   ( LIMIT -
TO ( EXACTKEYWORD  ,  "Indian 
Sign Languages”)   OR  LIMIT -
TO ( EXACTKEYWORD  ,  "Indian 
Sign Language"  ) ) 
Science Direct  "INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE 
TRANSLATION" OR "ISL 
TRANSLATION" OR "ISL 
RECOGNITION" OR "INDIAN LensOrg  
Google Scholar  Name of 
Dataset  Query  
SIGN LANGUAGE 
RECOGNITION"  
 
The workflow of the literature review p rocess has been 
shown using  Error! Reference source not found. . A total 
of 598 research articles were identified for the purpose of 
literature review using above mentioned queries from  four 
major research databases. In the next stage, 47 articles were 
excluded from the study because of redundancy. Upon 
preliminary literature investigation, every research article’s 
title and abstract were examined manually and then 414 
pertinent papers we re selected for further assessment 
criteria. Subsequently, 202 research articles were selected 
based on the criteria of availability  of research paper or 
whether it is open access. Four eligibility criteria were 
adopted for this literature survey in the next phase.  
 
Fig. 1.  Flowchart of comprehensive review process using 
PRISMA guidelines  
• The article should be peer reviewed.  
• The article should be related to Indian Sign Language.  
• The theme of the article should be related to 
recognition/translation of ISL to text.  
• The details about framework/implementation should 
have been mentioned in the research article . 
After stringent eligibility criteria more than 50 articles has 
been selected for this literature review.  
